Hello, good afternoon.
Welcome to session 513,
OpenGL Advanced 3D.
This session is a real treat
for all of us 3D enthusiasts.
We're going to show the process and
the very latest techniques for high-end
CGI generation using vertex programs.
Well,
the treat is not only on the content,
but also on the delivery.
We have a very special
celebrity guest today.
NVIDIA demo engineer Simon Green is
here to deconstruct the Wolfman
demo and share with us his expertise
and knowledge about the subject.
So to deliver the first
part of session 503,
OpenGL Advanced 3D,
I would like to introduce to the stage
Apple OpenGL engineer Geoff Stahl.
The first thing I'm going to do is
talk specifically about what advances
we've made in OpenGL for Jaguar.
Then we're going to hand it over
to Simon to talk specifically
about the Wolfman demo.
So that's me, Geoff Stahl,
and Simon will be handling
the second half from NVIDIA.
Again, I'm going to talk about
what's new with Jaguar.
We're going to walk through the
Wolfman and then take your questions
and answers both on Jaguar and how the
Wolfman was made after the session.
So what optimizations
do we have in Jaguar?
First thing we did was we realized
that while read pixels and draw
pixels are not the optimum path,
or draw pixels are not the optimum
path to get things to a card,
we still realize there are legacy
applications that need to use these or
there are valid reasons to use these.
So we optimized those.
Read pixels and draw pixels
now are supported on most
cards through DMA engines,
so relieving the CPU of
having to move all that data.
You'll see definitely in
your apps that use these,
you'll see improvements.
We still recommend using a
texturing path for when you
would normally use draw pixels,
but if you need to use it,
note that we have done some
implementation optimizations for that.
Also, copy text sub-image.
This now does not do a round trip
across the bus and will stay on the GPU,
so you may get rates up to 9,
10 gigabytes per second,
which is native on the card,
for your copy text sub-image.
So if you need to do this,
you should be seeing tremendous
increases in throughput.
Display list.
Display lists are now
optimized in your seed,
and we're going to continue
to further optimize them as we
move down and lock down Jaguar.
What we're looking to do is
move display lists through
a vertex array range scheme.
So what happens is when you
have primitives that you
run through a display list,
we'll take those primitives,
optimize them,
put them into a vertex array range,
and allow the card directly to map
those from AGP memory into the GPU.
We've seen tremendous
increases in using this.
And John Stauffer will talk
about it in the optimization.
He'll talk about specifically
about and show you what kind of
display list increases we've made.
So especially for like an architectural
application that is set up to use
display list and draw a thousand
spheres through display list,
those kind of applications will
definitely see some speed ups.
For general purpose applications
that you have a large array of data,
as they do with the Wolfman,
vertex array range is your friend,
and you want to move through that path.
Image Processing.
We've added the image processing
extension for all machines.
That includes all machines that
even support a software renderer.
So you'll be able to get the image
processing extensions and we'll go
through some of those in a minute,
what the optimizations there are.
Again, I mentioned vertex arrays.
Last year we came to this session,
or we came to talking about how to
get data through the system quickly.
And we said compile vertex
array is the best way to do it.
So you take a vertex array, compile it,
and that's the best way.
Well, we're moving past that now.
We're actually looking at vertex array
range where you can set a section
of memory up and map that into,
we will dynamically map that into
AGP and the GPU will DMA from that
memory with the vertices without having
to involve the CPU in the process.
That is going to be the fastest
path in Jaguar for you to use.
So look at vertex array range.
It's only a couple of additional
calls if you're already on vertex
arrays and it'll really give some
great speed ups for your applications.
for as far as things we've
added that aren't extensions,
surface texture.
Surface texture is supported
both in Cocoa and Carbon.
Carbon is AGL surface texture.
Cocoa is create texture.
I talked about this earlier
in one of my sessions.
And specifically,
this allows you to render to a surface,
which can be a window
that you just don't show,
or it can just be a window,
and use the content of that as a texture.
The requirements are very simply
whatever requirements were there
originally for the GPU for textures.
So if your GPU supports
rectangular textures,
then you can do a surface
texture of any arbitrary size.
If it doesn't support
rectangular textures,
you're going to still need a power
of two surface to be supported,
and you'll just pass that
in as you would normally.
Last, and probably the best news,
is extension support.
One of the things we concentrated on for
the 10.1 release was getting a very good,
stable OpenGL release that
you all could work on,
could build your applications,
and really didn't have any
downsides or any flaws in it.
We think we've really
achieved that with 10.1.
10.2, we said we really need to add
the features you're asking for.
So we had 34 extensions
coming into today,
and Jaguar has an additional,
at this point, planned 30 extensions.
So we're bringing up
the 64 new extensions,
and I'll go over what they are.
And there may be some more in the
works as we move toward the final.
So one of the main areas of the past year
that's really increased in visibility in
the commercial market is programmability.
Programmability is both on the
pixel side and on the vertex side.
We've supported through a set
of about seven extensions.
We have one unified extension,
our vertex program,
which we talked about a few days ago.
And that will take care of the
vertex programming along with
providing you a great tool,
the OpenGL shader builder,
which will allow you to work
on vertex programs today on
the Jaguar C that you have.
This gives us the vertex
programming functionality.
It's available for the ATI Radeon 8500.
NVIDIA GeForce 3 and 4 all support
vertex programming in hardware.
All other machines that support
OpenGL have a software implementation
that's optimized for the CPU.
What this means is your PowerBooks,
whatever generation they
are that you have out there,
if they support OpenGL,
you can use that OpenGL shader builder
and build shaders and have that
optimized software implementation.
From the pixel program
and fragment program side,
from the NVIDIA we have all
five of their programmability
on that pixel side extensions.
Registered Combiner 1 and 2,
Texture Shader 2 and 3,
which will support the full
pixel programmable path.
On the ATI side,
we're targeting ATI Fragment Shader as a
support there with the unified extension.
So vertex array range.
I think we talked about this already,
but to reiterate,
it allows the GPU to DMA the vertex
arrays directly from client memory.
You don't have to involve the CPU.
So this allows you to alleviate
the CPU of that burden,
use the CPU for other things,
and utilize the GPU to its fullest.
It supports both Radeon
cards and all NVIDIA cards,
but does require hardware TCL.
Apple vertex array object is a very
simple extension that extends this,
which allows you to add on the
idea of multiple vertex arrays
like you would have textures.
If you have texture objects,
you may want to have
vertex array objects.
So you would have for different
objects in your scene,
you could have a vertex array
for each one of them instead
of having to manipulate a huge,
large vertex array and have
sub ranges inside of that.
So that operates very similar to
texture objects with generate and bind.
Apple texture range is similar to
vertex array range but allows clients
to specify memory that they map texture
space and allow you a very fast texture
upload and utilizing this for the
maximum texture throughput performance.
John Stauffer will also talk about
this in the session following this
as far as performance of this.
Apple fence is a basically will
insert a token into the command
stream so it allows you to do more
synchronization if you have audio/video
synchronization you want to do.
Or OpenGL and some other process you can
do that with an Apple Fence extension
both synchronously and asynchronously
as far as the handling of the fence.
So some additional extensions.
For texturing,
we have texture mirror repeat,
which is going to basically
double the size of your texture
with a mirrored section of it.
Texture EMV crossbar,
which allows you to more
arbitrarily reference texture
units when you're doing combining.
Texture mirror once,
very similar to mirror repeat,
but the fact is that you have a single
mirror without the repeating edges.
SGI depth texture and SGI X shadow,
which is something that
Simon will talk about later,
where it was critical for the
Wolfman to get the self-shadowing.
This allows you to do
shadow mapping techniques.
These two extensions
are critical for that.
So rendering extension.
Something that's been there before
but I think we should really
mention is our multi-sample.
Multi-sample's been in through 10.1.
It's fully supported through
both Cocoa and Carbon and allows
you to do anti-aliasing both
in windowed and for full screen.
So you can have full screen
anti-aliasing support over all
cards that support the multi-sample.
Secondary color is an extension
that's been around for a while.
People are asking for it to support
secondary colors both in vertex
programs and through our normal path.
Fog coordinates allow you to
pass explicit fog coordinates.
Draw range elements.
It seems to you,
those folks who know OpenGL,
well that's an old extension.
Why is that new for Jaguar?
We wanted to make sure that was
in there so if you're checking for
that on machines that don't report
OpenGL 1.2 and only report 1.1,
you can specifically check for that
which allows you to draw a range of
elements instead of the entire array.
Stencil wrap for stencil shadows.
This is a key thing to wrapping
your stencil buffers around.
Fog distance allows you to specify
an eye radial fog distance instead
of just a planar from the eye point.
So it allows you to have more correct
looking fog which I know Austin will
be very happy with that we have that.
Multi-sample filter hint allows you,
as you may have read, there's a,
NVIDIA has a multi-sample
technique called Quinconcs.
And to do this you would specify
the four tap multi-sample and then
you would say nicest as far as
the filter hint and it would pick
the five tap Quinconcs algorithm.
What that does is allows you
to pick nicest or fastest in
your multi-sample algorithms.
And depth clamp, again,
in some of the shadowing algorithms
covering shadow volumes you
want depth clamping rather than
clamping to the actual frustum.
Pixel transfer,
we talked about RBM imaging, histogram,
blending, min-max,
some convolution filters,
those are all in there in every OpenGL,
any CPU that you have,
RBM imaging will be supported.
And also we have some new ATI extension,
blend equation separate,
which allows a separate equation
for the alpha and for the color,
which can be very useful at times,
and weighted min-max,
which allows you to do weighting
values for your blending.
And then lastly, blend square,
so for some lighting calculations,
that allows you to square in
the blending to bring out the
highlight if that's needed.
Point parameters,
both point parameters and point sprite
are supported across certain hardware,
and that allows you to specify
OpenGL either as points for like
a particle system or put a texture
at that point and show the texture,
so you can do billboarding
textures very simply.
So, that completes kind of
what's new for Jaguar.
We think that we really have
a great OpenGL and one of the
driving factors behind some of
the improvements has been some of
the research that Nvidia has done,
including the Wolfman demo.
We need to make sure that we
have all the features there,
we can run this,
and I guarantee that what you have in
your seed is exactly what we have up
here on stage running the Wolfman demo.
So all the features that Simon's
going to talk about are in Jaguar,
in the seed,
and are planned for the final release.
So, without further ado,
Simon Green from Nvidia to talk
about the anatomy of the Wolfman.
Thank you, Geoff.
So I'm not sure if I'd really
consider myself a celebrity,
but I do work for NVIDIA.
I actually work in the demo team.
For those of you that
aren't familiar with that,
NVIDIA actually has an internal group
whose job it is basically to create
demos that show off NVIDIA's hardware.
So today I'm going to be talking a
little bit about the Wolfman demo,
the anatomy of the Wolfman.
And it's all about the advanced
fur rendering techniques
that we used using OpenGL.
And that's a little
preview of the sound there.
So we have a little motto
in the NVIDIA demo team.
We make the marketing lies come true.
Now that's really just a joke,
but it has a serious point behind it.
Because when NVIDIA comes out
with a new piece of hardware,
we always have a number of new features.
So it's very much our job to
demonstrate those new features,
demonstrate what you can do
with the extra performance
that the new product provides.
It doesn't really matter
how good your technology is.
If you don't have something
that demonstrates it and shows
developers what's possible,
it's really not worth anything.
So that's our little motto.
Okay, so I'm going to give you
a brief overview here.
So the Wolfman was one of four
GeForce 4 demos that we had at launch,
and it was actually running on
the Macintosh on OS X at our
launch event in San Francisco.
And as I said,
the main reason for these demos is really
to showcase the performance and also
the programmability of the GeForce 4,
because GeForce 4 had several new
features that kind of enhanced
the programmability of the part.
Clearly, the main focus of the Werewolf
demo was to demonstrate this
volumetric fur rendering.
And the whole thing was animated
using the vertex shaders,
and I'll talk about that a little later.
And also the lighting was done using the
pixel shader technology that we have.
And the whole thing is also,
as Geoff mentioned,
is shadowed using shadow maps.
And it runs using OpenGL with
NVIDIA extensions.
So how did we do it?
So before we get to that, first of all,
why fur?
There were lots of different
demos we could have done.
But if you look in the real world,
a lot of things in the
real world are fuzzy.
It's very easy to do plastic and very
hard materials in computer graphics,
but it's much harder to do things that
are kind of fluffy or fuzzy or hairy,
those kind of general effects.
In addition to that,
fur wasn't something that people
had seen in real time very much.
There had been a couple of
Microsoft demos with some quite
simple fur rendering techniques,
but people hadn't seen it before on a
kind of fully animated character model.
So we thought that would
be a cool thing to try.
So how do you render fur?
Well, there are two basic methods.
The first method is probably
the most obvious one,
and that's just to use geometry.
So clearly fur is made up of
a number of different kind of,
well, a lot of hair strands, basically.
So the most obvious way to
model it is just with geometry.
So for each individual hair in the fur,
you basically just draw a curve,
and that curve would be
made up of line strips,
basically.
So the obvious problem with that method
is there's a lot of hairs in fur,
right?
I don't know how many of
you have seen Monsters,
Inc., the Pixar movie,
but apparently the Sully
character in that actually has
three million hairs on him.
So, you know, our hardware's good,
but it's not quite at the point
where it can actually render
three million individual hairs
and light them in real time.
So instead, we actually used what's
known as a volumetric method.
And the basic idea behind this is the
fur is represented using textures.
So rather than using geometry,
you're using images.
And it kind of approximates the kind of
gross look of the fur without actually
having to draw each individual hair.
So that's the method that we use.
So I'm just going to give you a little
brief history of fur rendering here.
Probably the first and most influential
reference in the literature to
do with fur rendering is this
paper called "Rendering Fur with
Three-Dimensional Textures." This is one
that Jim Kajir did back in SIGGRAPH 1989.
And, you know, 1989 is a long time ago
in computer graphics.
It's very much the kind of
golden age of computer graphics,
so this is a pretty old paper.
So the basic idea here was that
rather than using geometry,
you just represent the density of
the fur using a 3D volume texture.
And that basically just means
if you imagine an image and just
generalize it into three dimensions,
you have a volume texture.
So rather than having
a 2D array of pixels,
you have a 3D array of what actually
he called "texels," although
that's a slightly confusing term
because we now also use "texels"
to mean pixels within textures.
But that's just a detail.
His other main contribution was this
idea of actually lighting the hairs
based on the tangent direction.
Now, all the tangent direction means is
that's just the direction that each
individual hair strand is pointing in.
So what he did with all this was he
did quite a cool image of a teddy bear.
And if I go on
I can show you that picture.
And as you can see,
it's a very nice image.
And in some ways,
the fur rendering here is better quality
than the stuff that we do in real time.
But you have to bear in mind that
this was rendered on a network
of 16 IBM mainframes in total,
or at least there were 16 processors.
And it took two hours just
to create this one image.
So it's nice, but it took a lot of time,
and it's a long way from being real time.
So now we're going to
jump ahead 10 years or so.
This was the next major
paper on fur rendering.
This paper called "Real-time
Fur Over Arbitrary Surfaces" by a guy
called Jed Lengel at Microsoft Research.
He introduced this concept
of shell and fin rendering.
I'll get into what exactly
that means later on.
But the basic idea is you
create these concentric shells.
Imagine taking the base polygon mesh of
the character and then extruding it out
to create a number of concentric shells.
It's kind of like a Russian doll
with one inside the other.
Then you texture each of those
shells with a different image,
and that approximates the fur volume.
We'll talk about that more later on.
The second part is this idea of fins,
which is basically just extra
geometry that you use to
improve the silhouette edge.
The image that he created,
or at least the most
famous one that he created,
was this furry bunny rabbit right here.
And you can see, again,
this is a pretty impressive image.
This, I think,
had about 5,000 polygons in it.
And he was actually running
this on the original GeForce.
It was like a GeForce DDR.
And I believe it ran at
about 12 frames a second.
So pretty good.
I mean, interactive,
but not as fast as it could be.
And you can see there isn't really
much in the way of lighting on the fur,
either.
It looks relatively flat.
There's no kind of gloss to it.
So we decided we wanted to do a fur demo,
but teddy bears and bunnies,
they're really not NVIDIA's style.
So we had a meeting and we were
thinking about different things.
We considered doing a gorilla,
we considered doing a yeti,
the Sasquatch.
But in the end we decided on a werewolf.
So this is actually one of
the concept sketches that our
artist Daniel Hornick did.
And I have to give full credit
for him because these demos are
really all about the artwork.
If it wasn't for the art,
you'd probably be looking
at a furry Taurus,
or maybe a furry teapot,
rather than the furry werewolf right now.
Okay, so now I'm going to go ahead
and actually show you the demo,
so if we can switch to that machine.
I'm not sure how many of
you have seen this before,
but this is our werewolf demo.
As you can see, he just kind of happily
walks along this street.
He has a number of different
animations that he goes through.
This is very much the money shot here,
I think,
where he does the howl at the moon.
If I just wait a little while.
There's several interesting things
that you should be looking at here.
First of all, the fur itself.
If we just pause it here,
you notice there's a pretty
convincing sense of furriness here.
You notice when I move
the light around here,
you notice that there's a very
subtle sheen that goes across
the fur as we move the light.
That's all done using the
pixel shader hardware,
and I'll talk about that in a minute.
The second obvious thing is the whole
scene is shadowed using shadow maps.
So you notice as the werewolf
walks past the lights here,
he is casting shadows
not only on the ground,
but actually on his body as well.
If I run it in slow motion here,
you notice there is, for instance,
a shadow.
There is a shadow of his arm on his leg,
for instance.
So, you know,
his body is casting shadows on itself,
not just on the ground.
The other major feature we're
showing off here is bump mapping.
Now, other demos have done this,
but if you look at the quality of
the bump mapping on his face here,
you'll see there's a lot of detail
if we look at the wireframe.
One of our marketing guys described this
as an irresponsible use of polygons.
I think that's an apt description.
When you look at the wireframe and
it just looks completely white,
that's really what we aim for.
But if you look at the
geometry on the face here,
you'll notice that a lot of that
detail really comes from the bump map.
It's not in the geometry itself.
Okay, so that gives you an idea
of what the demo looks like.
If we can switch back to the slides.
Oh, we're on.
So just a few statistics about that.
There are about 100,000 polygons in
the model and the scene in total.
So it's saying 100,000
polygons per frame.
And the demo runs at
about 30 frames a second.
So it's pretty fast.
So, rendering fur with shells and fins.
So how do you actually
use this technique?
So as I said earlier,
the basic idea is to generate these
concentric shells by scaling the base
skin mesh along the vertex normal.
Now, I'm not sure how familiar you
people are with 3D graphics,
but that's a relatively
simple thing to do.
Once you have the polygon mesh,
you just duplicate it several times
and scale it along the vertex normal.
Perhaps later on we might go back
to the demo and I can actually show
you it within the demo as well.
So once you have these shells,
you texture each shell with a
separate 2D texture that describes
a slice through the fur geometry.
So you have this fur geometry
that describes all the individual
pieces of hair in the fur,
and then you generate these
2D textures that kind of slice
it through that geometry.
So once you have those fur textures,
you apply them to the shells,
you blend it all together using blending,
and that gives you the final result
of this semi-transparent furry volume.
And one other trick that you can use to
kind of improve the illusion of depth,
if you like, is to just shade the lower
layers in the fur a little bit
darker than the top layers.
And that kind of simulates
the self-shadowing of the fur,
because clearly light doesn't get
so deep into the lower layers.
And in this demo,
we actually just used eight layers.
Now, you could use more,
but clearly for each extra layer you use,
that decreases the bit of depth.
So we experimented
with different numbers,
but eight was the best kind
of balance between the look of
the fur and the performance.
So you might be asking
yourself the question,
how do you create these fur textures?
And we spent quite a lot of time on this,
and we ended up actually doing
a special kind of custom tool
just to generate the fur.
A lot of the initial demos we had
just used very simple fur that
looked very kind of combed and flat.
And, you know,
we decided that wasn't really the
look we wanted for a werewolf.
You know, you have to have a lot of hair.
You expect werewolf fur to be
more kind of matted and dirty.
So we actually came up with
this fur design tool that,
you know, enabled us to kind of
tweak the fur parameters,
like the curly nurse.
And, you know,
you can kind of apply noise to it to
basically kind of make it more random.
And this is a screenshot of the tool,
and you can kind of see the
sliders at the top there.
So I just went through most of this.
The hairs themselves are actually defined
something like using a particle system.
So that just means that they're kind
of points moving almost under gravity.
And that's what we use to kind of define
the path that each individual hair takes.
And then in the tool,
those hairs are previewed
using line strips.
And then once you're happy
with the look of the fur,
you press a button and it
actually voxelizes that
geometry into a volume texture,
and then it writes out
those textures to disk.
So this is what those fur
textures actually look like.
You can see, so 0 to 7 here,
this is actually going up
through the fur volume.
So you can see at level 0 there,
they just look like a lot of kind of
small points because the hairs are
kind of pointing straight upwards.
And then as we go up,
they kind of move over,
the fur is kind of combed to the right.
So as we move up through those textures,
you kind of see more and more of the fur.
And then by the time we get to level 7,
a lot of the hairs
have kind of faded out.
So as we go up through the volume,
the density decreases.
So we actually used relatively
small fur textures in this demo,
just 256 by 256 pixels.
And the main reason for that is
because fur is relatively random,
you can actually repeat it
several times over the surface,
and you don't really notice
that it's a repeating pattern.
And it's good to keep textures small
because it also improves the texture.
It improves the kind of cache coherency
in the texture mapping hardware.
So we use 256 by 256.
And what you're actually
seeing in these images here
is actually the alpha channel.
So that represents the
density of the fur,
effectively,
how much fur there is at any one point.
What you're not seeing is the
RGB components of the texture,
which actually store a
per pixel tangent vector.
So that basically describes
which direction each individual
fur strand is pointing in.
And we use that to do the lighting,
which is what gives the fur
that kind of glossy look.
So this is just an image
of the fur without any kind
of color or lighting on it.
And you can see it looks pretty good,
but it's very, it looks like an albino
wolf or something.
So if we go on to the next image here.
So to give the fur color,
we actually use this fur,
a totally separate fur color texture.
And this fur color texture
covers the whole of the surface,
whereas the fur textures
themselves are repeated like,
you know, ten times over each surface.
The fur color texture covers the whole
surface and allows us to kind of,
you know, give it this colored,
kind of striped look.
So when you put the fur textures together
with the color texture and the lighting,
you get something that looks like that.
So there's only one problem with
using this shells technique.
And as you can imagine,
when you look at the
shells from the side,
especially on the
silhouette of the character,
you start to see the gaps
between those shells.
And I'll show you what that
looks like in a second.
So the solution that Jed Langell came
up with to improve this was to add
this geometry that he calls fins.
And they're called fins because literally
they kind of stick out from the surface.
And the way we generate this
geometry is we basically just,
for each edge in the
original polygon mesh,
we create an additional quadrangle
that just kind of sticks
up straight from that mesh.
And these fins are textured
with a totally separate image
that just has a kind of,
you know,
generic cross section of the fur in it.
I'll show you what that
looks like in a minute.
Now,
there's several ways you could do this.
You could try and dynamically generate
these fins just on the silhouette,
but that would be quite expensive.
So, it turns out the easiest way to do it
is just to create fins everywhere in
the model and then just fade them in
and out based on the angle between the
surface normal and the view direction,
so that they only --
they're always there,
but they only appear on
the silhouette edges.
So, this is what the actual
fin texture looks like.
Okay, so we're just going to step
through a few images here.
This is just a close-up
of the werewolf's arm,
and you can see the polygon mesh there.
This is what it looks like with the first
shells that I was talking about earlier.
You can see they're just
copies of the base mesh,
but just extruded out
along the vertex normal.
And then finally we add the fins in it,
and it's a little hard to see
where the fins really are there,
but you can see that they kind of poke
out from the silhouette of the character.
So when you put it all together,
it looks something like that.
And in this image, at the edges here,
you do start to see the
gaps between the shells.
And it's pretty obvious that
the fins and the shells aren't
really perfectly lined up.
But when you look at
that from a distance,
you really can't tell.
So it's, like all computer graphics,
it's a hack, right?
It's an illusion, but...
It works.
So actually at this point
I might just switch back to the,
to demo machine three if I could.
Because this stuff is
easier to understand.
[Transcript missing]
So I'm going to try and zoom up here
and show you actually how the fur works.
So first of all,
I'm going to switch off the fins,
and I'm going to remove
all the fur layers.
So this is what a naked werewolf looks
like if you're into that kind of thing.
One of the slightly crazy things
actually is that even underneath his fur,
this werewolf is bump mapped,
which may seem a bit over the top,
but you can see as
I move the light around,
you can see all his ribs
there and his spine.
So I'm going to add back in
the fur layers one by one.
You can kind of see the
effect that each one has.
So that's the base layer.
That's level zero that we
saw in the images earlier.
Yeah,
it doesn't really look like fur yet.
So that's layer 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
So you can see as you add in the layers,
you get more and more depth.
And we can also kind of
scale the layers between,
or scale the distance
between each of those shells.
You know, this gives the well something
of a kind of blow-dried look,
I always think.
But yeah, if you go too far,
then the illusion is really shattered,
so we usually keep it
relatively modest like that.
So this is without fins,
and you can see that
if you get too close,
[Transcript missing]
So you see, because the light is
behind the character here,
the fins are lit in such a way that
they actually receive light from behind,
so it gives him a nice kind of rim
lighting highlight around his edge there.
Okay, so hopefully that gives you a
good idea of how the FUR works.
We can switch back to the slides.
Okay, so how do we model and
animate this character?
So the whole thing was modeled in Maya,
which is, of course,
now available on OS X.
So you can all rush home and
model your own werewolves.
There's no excuse.
One of the interesting things
about our workflow is we do
model everything as NURBS,
NURBS surfaces,
which are a curved surface description.
And the nice thing about that is it kind
of gives us the flexibility to change
the number of polygons in the model.
So we model it as NURBS,
and then once it looks good,
we then convert it to polygons.
And then if we later decide that
we can get away with more polygons,
or perhaps we need to scale
back and we need fewer polygons,
then we can just change
the tessellation in Maya,
and it'll generate that
many polygons for us.
So it is nice to have that flexibility.
The base mesh of the character
I showed you is a little bit different.
The base mesh of the character I showed
you has about 20,000 polygons in total.
Now, not all of those, as you noticed,
are furry.
Not everywhere on the werewolf is furry,
mainly his back and his arms,
and there's a bit on the legs.
So when you take those polygons
and multiply them by eight,
that's where the 100,000
polygons comes from.
Now, as for the animation,
the whole thing is
animated using a skeleton,
and that skeleton has 61 bones in it.
So, you know, all the spine, the arm,
the legs, and it even has, like,
all the fingers and thumbs.
So, you know, if we wanted to,
this werewolf could play the piano.
An interesting thing that our artists
pointed out to me is that in some ways
these characters are comparable to
the complexity that people are using
in film and television production.
The number of polygons perhaps isn't,
but the character setup is.
In total there were about a thousand
frames of animation that was keyframed
by an animator that we contracted,
and it runs at 30 frames a second.
So this is just a quick
screenshot of the Wolfman in Maya.
You can see the skeleton
there and the fingers.
The yellow surfaces that you see are
the surfaces that we applied fur to.
And the red ones, I think,
are just the surfaces
that weren't skinned.
So that means they don't
actually bend at all,
like the claws are always
just static objects.
So that's what our werewolf
looks like in Maya.
So once we have this stuff in Maya,
you may be asking the question,
how do we make it run in real time?
In the demo team,
we actually have our own
proprietary NVIDIA demo engine,
which we imaginatively call NVDemo.
This is used for all of the in-house,
well, pretty much most of the demos
that we do in-house at NVIDIA.
And it basically provides us
with a scene graph library.
So this is something that kind of
manages all the lights and materials
and cameras and all that kind of stuff.
And it also, it takes care of managing
all that scene data,
also doing stuff like
culling and sorting.
Basically all that kind of tedious
legwork that you have to do when you're
doing a real time 3D application.
And the other big part of it is we
also have a Maya plug-in that will
take the data from Maya and convert
the geometry and the lights and the
materials to our own custom file format,
which is then loaded into the demo
engine for display in real time.
Okay, so how do we actually
make this werewolf move?
So all the animation is
done using vertex shaders.
And I believe in previous
sessions they have talked about
vertex programs a little bit.
So I'm not going to go into
too much technical detail here.
But vertex shaders are really cool.
So they basically give you total control
over the hardware processing of geometry.
So you can do your own transformations.
You can do your own
lighting calculations.
If you want to do some
weird kind of deformation,
you can basically write
that code yourself.
And it's exposed as a relatively
simple assembly language,
which does scare off some people.
But I personally like
writing in assembly language,
but that's just my personal preference.
But one interesting thing is
there are going to be higher
level languages coming out soon.
There's OpenGL 2.0 and there's
various other efforts that
are going on at this point.
So at some point you will be able to
write in a C-like language and then
it will be compiled to the actual
vertex program assembly language.
So we use vertex shaders in the
werewolf demo for several things.
First of all to do the skinning.
I'm going to talk about a
little bit about the skinning.
I'm going to talk a little bit about
what skinning is about in a minute.
But basically that's the
process of making the skin
deform as the skeleton moves.
Secondly, for scaling the fur layers
along the vertex normal,
that's actually a very important thing,
but it's a very simple thing
to do in a vertex shader.
That's just a single instruction that
takes the vertex position and basically
adds a fraction of the normal onto that
position for each of the fur layers.
Thirdly,
we use vertex shaders for the setup
calculations for the per-pixel
lighting for the bump mapping and
for the fur shader that you saw.
Lastly,
we use it to do the text coordinate
generation for the shadow mapping.
So I don't think I'm going to go
through this in too much detail,
but this is just a little extract
from one of the vertex programs
that we used in the werewolf demo.
And it starts off with the skinning.
So what we do here is we're
actually using a technique called
matrix palette skinning here.
So that means there's several matrices,
and then for each vertex there's
an index which describes which of
those matrices we're going to use.
So anyway, so basically we transform
the vertex by the first bone,
and then we also have to transform
the normal by that bone matrix.
And each of these is weighted as well,
so that's what those moles there do.
We also have to do that
for binormals as well,
which is part of how the
per pixel lighting is done.
So next you see we have the MAD here,
and that's what does the scaling
of the vertex along the normal,
and that's just a single instruction.
Next, we actually have to project
that vertex to the screen.
So these four DP4s actually take
that coordinate in I-space and
then transform it to clip space.
So once we've actually figured
out the position of the vertex,
we have to do some calculations
to figure out the lighting.
So we work out the view vector,
so that's basically the vector
from the eye to the position of
the vertex that we're lighting.
So we work that out.
Then we work out the half-angle vector.
This is a kind of standard
way of doing Blinn shading.
It's basically a vector that's
halfway between the eye vector and
the light direction in this case.
We have to transform
that into tangent space.
I'm not going to go into
a huge amount of detail,
as I said earlier.
But basically,
once we've done all that setup,
we take those values and we
store them in the output colors.
So that gives you a feel, at least,
for what a real vertex program
looks like and the kind
So the first part of the code there
that we saw was doing the skinning.
So the justification behind skinning is,
you know,
we want to have a smooth skin that
covers the whole of the character,
right?
And we want that skin to move
as the character animates.
Now,
there are several ways you could do that.
You can imagine the easiest way to
do it would just be to store the
positions of each of those vertices
for every frame in the animation,
right?
And that would give you
a lot of flexibility.
You know,
you could do muscles bulging and have
jiggle and all that kind of stuff.
But that would be a very
expensive way of doing it,
both in terms of storage -- actually,
mainly just in terms of storage.
So the idea behind skinning is
rather than storing all that data,
we basically just store a
static skin for the character.
And then we animate the skeleton.
So the skeleton is what
I showed you earlier in Maya.
So we animate the skeleton and we use the
skeleton to deform the skin in real time.
And the vertex shading hardware
of the GeForce 4 is actually doing
that deformation in real time.
So the basic idea is,
as we saw in the code,
is you transform each vertex by
multiple different transformations.
And they're basically the
transformations of the nearby bones.
So if you imagine in a werewolf's arm,
this position on his skin is clearly
affected by the bone of the forearm
here and also by this kind of upper arm
bone and maybe the shoulder as well.
So the final position of the vertex
is basically a kind of weighted
blend between those transformations.
And we store those weights
actually with each vertex.
There are tools within Maya where you
can actually paint vertex weightings.
And most Maya users are
familiar with this technique.
I think it's called smooth
skinning within Maya itself.
One of the things about skinning is
it's always a lot of fun to debug
because when you're--it's one of
those things where either you get
it right or it's totally broken.
So this is just a funny image,
which is one of the--where
the skinning went wrong.
I must confess I had nightmares
about this for weeks afterwards.
It's something about the way his
hand is kind of distorted and he
has these really long fingers.
Yeah,
I still can't look at that actually.
This is another kind of one
of these outtake images.
This actually wasn't a bug in the code.
This was because the animator we had,
Geoff Bell, who did a great job,
by the way, was more of a kind of
traditional 2D animator.
So he was animating
this character in Maya,
mainly looking at it from the side.
So he wasn't really, you know,
from the view you're
normally looking at it at,
it's not clear that the hand was
actually going through its face.
But when we looked at it from this angle,
it was a lot more obvious
that that wasn't a good
position for his hand to be in.
Okay,
so now we're going to go on and talk
about pixel shaders a little bit.
Again, I'm not sure how much experience
you guys have with pixel shaders,
but...
The basic idea is pixel shaders offer you
programmability at the per pixel level.
Now, at this point in time,
they're not quite as flexible
as the vertex shaders.
You have some control over what
you can do with pixels and you can
do a lot of blending operations,
but it's more of a kind of
configurable hardware than
actual programmability per se.
Now, in OpenGL on NVIDIA hardware,
pixel shaders are exposed
using two extensions.
The first one is MVTextureShader.
Now,
that's what gives you control over the
kind of texture addressing operations.
So you can do dependent texture lookups.
That is kind of using the results
of one texture lookup to affect the
lookup in a subsequent texture lookup.
And you can also do things
like you can do dot products
between texture coordinates.
You can do that by adding color values.
So quite often you use that for lighting.
The nice thing about
texture shader as well,
everything happens in
floating point precision.
So you have a much more precise result.
The second part of pixel shaders
in OpenGL on NVIDIA hardware is
the NV register combiner extension.
Now, this is basically a programmable
means of combining texture
and color results together.
And it's actually very flexible on the
GeForce 4 because you actually have
eight combiner stages that you can use.
So that means that there's a lot of math
you can do in the register combiners.
And the anisotropic lighting model that
you saw on the fur there was actually
all done in the register combiners.
The only disadvantage of the
register combiners is that they
happen in fixed point precision.
So I think it's actually
a nine bit precision.
But they are very, very fast.
So that's the kind of trade-off.
[Transcript missing]
OK, so let's talk a bit about shadows.
Everything in the demo is
shadowed using shadow maps.
For those of you that aren't
familiar with shadow maps,
shadow maps are the same technique
that are like Pixar used,
for instance,
in "Renderman" to do all their shadows.
The great thing about shadow maps is
that they're an image space technique.
You may also be familiar
with stencil shadow volumes,
which can be a great way of doing
your shadows for some applications.
But the great thing about shadow
maps is that because they're
an image space technique,
all you have to do is one extra pass.
As I say here,
the other good thing is that
performance is linear with
the complexity of the scene.
You really don't have to do any
kind of pre-processing of the scene.
If you can render something,
then you can shadow it.
They are relatively easy to
implement once you have the code
for reading back the depth buffer.
Now, in OpenGL,
the shadow mapping hardware on
the GeForce 3 and 4 are exposed
using the GL ARB Shadow extension.
There was also--this demo is
actually using the SGIX extension,
which provides pretty much
the same functionality,
but that functionality is now being
rolled into the ARB Shadow extension.
The only disadvantages of using
shadow maps are the aliasing.
You might have noticed in the demo that
I showed you that you do occasionally see
some kind of blockiness in the shadows.
That's just not a fact of the fact
that it is an image space technique.
Where the shadow map
texture is magnified,
you are going to start seeing
those kind of magnified textiles.
So I'm just going to briefly go
over the shadow map algorithm here.
So as I said,
the first pass when you're using
shadow maps is to render the scene
from the light's point of view.
So if you imagine where the
lights were in that scene,
the street lights,
we're actually in a separate
pass rendering the scene from
that light's point of view,
kind of looking down on
the werewolf at the street.
So, once we've done that render,
we copy the depth information.
And that's an interesting point,
because you only really
need the depth values.
You don't have to render color or
textures or any of that kind of stuff.
You just copy the depth
information to a texture.
So that texture basically
is our shadow map texture.
So in the second pass,
when we're actually drawing
the character with color,
we project that shadow map
texture back onto the scene,
and this is using projective
texturing in OpenGL,
which is a fairly well-known technique.
And if you look in your OpenGL Redbook,
it will explain how
projective texturing works.
And I should also mention that
if you go to the NVIDIA website,
we do have a lot of examples and a
lot of presentations about how to
do shadow mapping and how to use
pixel shaders and vertex shaders.
But anyway, you project that shadow map
texture back onto the scene,
and then the hardware
actually does this comparison.
So it does a comparison between the depth
of the pixel that you're rendering at
that point and the corresponding depth
from the point of view of the light.
So I really should have
had a diagram here,
but the basic idea is if the value in
the shadow map is less than the depth
value of the pixel we're rendering,
then that means that there must be
something between us and the light.
So therefore,
the point we're looking at is shadowed.
On the other hand,
if those values are roughly equal,
that means there's nothing in the way
and therefore the point is visible,
so we're unshallowed.
So that's how shadow maps work.
And they're a great technique,
and I recommend you use them.
So here I just thought I'd give you
a little bit of a look into what
the actual pixel shader code does.
Now, there are various different ways
of expressing pixel shaders,
and I've actually just given you pseudo
code here because the actual register
combiner setup code would be very long
and it would fill like pages and pages.
So this is really just pseudo code,
but it gives you a good idea of
basically how we're doing the
bump mapping in the werewolf demo.
So I showed you a lot of the
kind of textures that were
kind of made up for earlier,
but this is concentrating
on the bump mapping.
So in texture zero we have the color map.
So that's basically just
the color of the surface.
One interesting detail is the
alpha channel of that color map
contains a kind of shininess map.
So that basically represents
how shiny each point is.
So, for instance,
on the mouth of the werewolf,
we want that to look wet and shiny,
so that would have a very
high shininess value.
I'll actually show you some
of the textures later on.
So in texture unit one,
we have the bump map.
In actual fact, it's a normal map,
and I'll show you what that
looks like in a second.
In texture unit two,
we actually have special
texture that encodes the,
it's not really a Phong specular map,
actually, it's more of a kind of Phong,
Phong-Blin specular map.
But that basically determines how
the light interacts with the surface,
and how big the specular highlight looks.
So if you look at that texture,
it basically just encodes a curve,
a kind of power curve
that goes up like this.
and Texture 3 contains a shadow map.
So, one of the cool things
about the GeForce 4 was that
It actually exposed a new
texture-shadow operation,
which meant that we could do the
color map and bump map with specular
in just three texture units,
whereas previously it took four.
That allowed us to also
include a shadow map,
so for the first time we
could actually do color map,
bump map stuff with a shadow
map all in a single path.
That's what we're using in the demo here.
So, in the primary and secondary colors,
we send down the light direction
and the half-angle vector.
And then basically in
the register combiners,
we're computing the diffuse lighting,
so that just computes n.l, basically.
That gives you your diffuse lighting.
Then we calculate the shadow factor.
One of the things you'll come across
with shadows is you don't want your
shadows to look completely black.
Although, in the real world,
that's how they would be.
If you have a point light up
here and something's in the way,
then this part is completely black.
There's a lot of ambient lighting that
we're not really simulating in real time.
To compensate for that fact,
we make the shadows only slightly darken
the color of the surface at that point.
When something's in shadow,
it just gets 50% darker.
It doesn't actually go to black.
That's what that shadow
factor there means.
Then we just multiply the diffuse
lighting by the color map.
Now, at the same time,
the specular lighting is being
computed in the texture shaders.
So, the texture shaders,
if you look at the bottom here,
are actually doing this dot
product texture 1D operation,
which basically does a dot product
between the half angle vector that
we sent down and the normal value
that came out of the normal map,
and then looking up in a 1D texture
that kind of gives us the exponent.
So, the 1D texture is what gives us
that to the power of p there.
So, in the register combiners,
we take that specular value,
we multiply it by the shininess,
and that gives us our specular lighting.
And that's what gives you the kind
of highlights on the bump maps.
So, and then, almost done,
we multiply both of those
by the shadow factors.
So one interesting thing is you do
want the specular term to completely
disappear when the surface is in shadow.
So you see we multiply the
diffuse by the shadow factor,
and then we just multiply the
specular by the actual shadow
value out of the shadow map,
which is just 0 or 1.
And then finally, we do the fog.
I'm not sure if you noticed in the demo,
but the street does actually
kind of fog out to transparent.
So that's what gives you that effect.
Okay, so here I'm just going to show
you some of the texture maps
that are used in the demo.
These were all actually mainly
painted within Photoshop.
We also used DeepPaint 3D for some work.
But these are really,
really detailed maps.
Some of these go up to 2K by 2K.
One of the nice things,
GeForce 4 has 128 meg of memory,
so you have plenty of memory to
waste on really big textures.
So that's what the color map looks like.
So this is obviously the
face we're looking at here.
The eyes are separate surfaces,
so you don't see the eyes.
The purple bit at the bottom
is actually the mouth.
So this is the shininess map
that I was talking about earlier.
So you can see the mouth is
almost completely white because we
want that area to be very shiny.
And the nostrils also tend to be a bit
kind of greasy and therefore shiny.
And his eyes, well the eye sockets at
least aren't shiny at all.
So this is what a normal map looks like.
Now, for those of you who haven't
seen a normal map before,
this probably looks a little bit unusual.
The way this works is we
actually don't author these
normal maps looking like this.
We author them as
basically a height field.
So they're just drawn as a black and
white image where black represents
kind of a low part in the surface
and white represents a high part.
And then we run them through a
special filter that kind of takes that
height field and then works out what
the normal would be at each point.
So, and then that normal is
encoded as an RGB color.
So that's why this
looks a little unusual.
The reason it's mainly blue is
because the normals are mainly
pointing out of the page,
right,
which means their Z value is very big,
and a big Z value translates
to a big blue value.
And so it mainly looks blue.
And then depending on the
direction that normal is pointing,
it'll have different amounts
of red and green in it.
The other way you can think about
it is it's like it was a real
surface that's lit with a red,
green,
and a blue light in different positions.
So that's what a normal map looks like.
And then you put it all together and
that's what the final result looks like.
So we're almost out of time here.
Just a little few words about
future extensions to this technique.
One of the things that we thought
about but didn't really have
time for were the fur dynamics.
It would have been nice to actually make
the fur move as the character animated.
You could do this by moving the
shell geometry independently
from the underlying skin.
You could do that either based on a real
physical simulation or maybe just make
it lag behind the skin a little bit.
That's one of the really
cool things that Pixar do.
Their fur has a full physics simulation
run on it so it bounces around.
The other thing that's going to
be interesting on future hardware
is this idea of ray marching,
which is basically similar to
the shells and fins technique,
but you're actually doing all the
blending within the pixel shader.
I don't think it's any secret that
future hardware is going to be a
lot more programmable and a lot
more flexible and a lot faster.
You'll actually be able to do all
that blending within the pixel shader
itself and actually march through a
3D texture to give you that illusion
of depth without using the shells.
The nice thing about that is that
reduces the amount of blending that
you're having to do in the frame buffer,
which is very bandwidth intensive.
And then lastly, the holy grail is just
to do with geometry.
So just draw curves for each
individual strand of hair,
as I said.
But it's very hard to
do the anti-aliasing and
the shadowing with that.
But we'll get there.
Okay, so just a final summary.
Program of vertex and pixel shaders
allow you to control the hardware.
And I think it is true in some
sense that real time and offline
production rendering are converging.
What people were doing offline
in movies a couple of years ago,
we are kind of approaching
doing in real time now.
And the tools are getting
a lot better as well,
so it's becoming a lot easier to just
author something in Maya and then just
display it in real time and animate it.
So I think it's a very exciting
time for real time 3D graphics.
One of the other interesting
things is that this programmable
graphics hardware is not only
useful for graphics these days,
not only games and those kind of things,
but also, as we've seen in the Jaguar
UI work that's been done at Apple,
it's also very useful for doing
2D operations as well now.
2D imaging, filters, video processing,
and also user interfaces.
In fact, people are even using pixel
shaders to do 3D rendering.
And I think it's a really interesting
time for real time 3D rendering.
And kind of simulation work as well,
doing kind of fluid
dynamics in pixel shaders.
So there's a lot of possibilities there.
And as I said,
the next generation hardware
is going to be faster,
even more programmable.
So it's only going to get better.
So, yeah,
you should start learning this stuff now.
I don't want to make this sound
like an off-square speech,
but I'm just going to
give a few credits here.
Curtis Beeson and Joe Demers
did the engine code.
Daniel Hornick did all the
modeling and texturing.
Geoff Bell did the character animation.
Ken Crete-Aditz, sound design.
I just did some additional
code on the shaders.
Mark Daly's my boss,
so I have to say thanks to him.
And that's just another outtake
image where the werewolf's mouth for
some reason popped out of his head.
And there are some references,
should you want to pursue
this in your own time.
And that's all I have.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Simon.
I just want to mention
here a quick roadmap.
This is a must-attend session, 5.1.4,
OpenGL Performance and Optimization.
And the feedback forum
tomorrow afternoon,
last session of the conference,
for you to let us know
what else you need.
Here's a couple of contacts,
Simon for NVIDIA and myself,
Sergio at Apple.com,
for any inquiries you may have.